The Lord of Laṅkā was then immediately awakened [from his reflection], feeling a revulsion (parāvṛtti) in his mind and re
alising that the world was nothing but his own mind: he was settled in the realm of non-discrimination, was urged by the
stock of his past good deeds, acquired the cleverness of understanding all the texts, obtained the faculty of seeing th
ings as they are, was no more dependent upon others, observed things excellently with his own wisdom (buddhi), gained th
e insight that was not of discursive reasoning, was no more dependent upon others,1 became a great Yogin of the discipli
ne, was able to manifest himself in all excellent forms, got thoroughly acquainted with all skilful means, had the knowl
edge of the characteristic aspects of every stage, by which he would surmount it skilfully, was delighted to look into2 
the self-nature of Citta, Manas, Manovijñāna, got a view whereby he could cut himself loose from the triple continuation
, had the knowledge of disposing of every argument of (10) the philosophers on causation, thoroughly understood the Tath
āgata-garbha, the stage of Buddhahood, the inmost self, found himself abiding in the Buddha-knowledge; [when suddenly] a
voice was heard from the sky, saying, “It is to be known by oneself.”“Well done, well done, Lord of Laṅkā! Well done, i
ndeed, Lord of Laṅkā, for once more! The Yogin is to discipline himself as thou doest. The Tathāgatas and all things are
to be viewed as they are viewed by thee; otherwise viewed, it is nihilism.All things are to be comprehended by transcen
ding the Citta, Manas, and Vijñāna as is done by thee. Thou shouldst look inwardly and not become attached to the letter
and a superficial view of things;thou shouldst not fall into the attainments, conceptions, experiences, views, and Samā
dhis of the Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers; thou shouldst not have any liking for small talk and witticism;
thou shouldst not cherish the notion of self-substance,3 nor have any thought for the vainglory of rulership, nor dwell 
on such Dhyānas as belong to the six Dhyānas, etc. “Lord of Laṅkā, this is the realisation of the great Yogins: to destr
oy the discourses advanced by others, to crush mischievous views in pieces, to keep themselves properly away from ego-ce
ntered notions, to cause a revulsion in the depths of the mind fittingly by means of an exquisite knowledge. Such are so
ns of the Buddha who walk in the way of the Mahāyāna. In order to enter upon the stage of self-realisation as attained b
y the Tathāgatas, the discipline is to be pursued by thee.“Lord of Laṅkā, conducting thyself in this manner, let thee be
further purified in the way thou hast attained; (11) by disciplining thyself well in Samādhi and Samāpatti, follow not 
the state realised and enjoyed by the Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers, which rises from the imagination of t
hose who discipline themselves according to the practices of the puerile philosophers. They cling to the individual form
s of the world created by their egotistical ideas; they maintain such notions as element, quality, and substance; they c
ling tenaciously to views originating from ignorance; they become confused by cherishing the idea of birth where prevail
s emptiness; they cling to discrimination [as real]; they fall into the way of thinking where obtains [the dualism of] q
ualifying and qualified.“Lord of Laṅkā, this is what leads to various excellent attainments, this is what makes one grow
aware of the inmost attainment, this is the Mahāyāna realisation. This will result in the acquirement of an excellent c
ondition of existence. “Lord of Laṅkā, by entering upon the Mahāyāna discipline the veils [of ignorance] are destroyed, 
and one turns away from the multitudinous waves of the Vijñāna and falls not into the refuge and practice of the philoso
phers.“Lord of Laṅkā, the philosophers' practice starts from their own egotistic attachments. Their ugly practice arises
from adhering to dualistic views concerning the self-nature of the Vijñāna. “Well done, Lord of Laṅkā; reflect on the s
ignification of this as you did when seeing the Tathāgata before; for this, indeed, is seeing the Tathāgata.”

At that time it occurred to Rāvaṇa: “I wish to see the Blessed One again, who has all the disciplinary practices at his c
ommand, who has turned away from the practices of the philosophers, who is born of the state of realisation in the inmos
t consciousness, and who is beyond [the dualism of] the transformed and the transforming. He is the knowledge (12) reali
sed by the Yogins, he is the realisation attained by those who enjoy the perfect bliss of the Samādhi which they gain by
coming to an intuitive understanding through meditation.May I see thus [again] the Compassionate One by means of his mi
raculous powers in whom the fuel of passion and discrimination is destroyed, who is surrounded by sons of the Buddha, wh
o has penetrated into the minds and thoughts of all beings, who moves about everywhere, who knows everything, who keeps 
himself away from work (kriyā) and form (lakṣana); seeing him may I attain what I have not yet attained, [retain] what I
have already gained, may I conduct myself with non-discrimination, abide in the joy of Samādhi and Samāpatti, and attai
n the ground where the Tathāgatas walk, and in these make progress.”

At that moment, the Blessed One recognising that the Lord of Laṅkā is to attain the Anutpattikadharmakshanti showed his g
lorious compassion for the ten-headed one by making himself visible once more on the mountain-peak studded with many jew
els and enveloped in a net-work of jewels.The ten-headed King of Laṅkā saw the splendour again as seen before on the mou
ntain-peak, [he saw] the Tathāgata, who was the Arhat and the Fully-Enlightened One, with the thirty-two marks of excell
ence beautifully adorning his person, and also saw himself on each mountain-peak, together with Mahāmati, in front of th
e Tathāgata, the Fully-Enlightened One, putting forward his discourse on the realisation experienced by the Tathāgata in
his inmost self, and, surrounded by the Yakshas, conversing on the verbal teachings and stories [of the Buddha]. Those 
(13) [Buddha]-lands were seen with the Leaders.4

Then the Blessed One beholding again this great assembly with his wisdom-eye, which is not the human eye, laughed loudly 
and most vigorously like the lion-king. Emitting rays of light from the tuft of hair between the eyebrows, from the ribs
, from the loins, from the Srivatsa5 on the breast, and from every pore of the skin, — emitting rays of light which shon
e flaming like the fire taking place at the end of a kalpa, like a luminous rainbow, like the rising sun, blazing brilli
antly, gloriously—which were observed from the sky by Śakra, Brahma, and the guardians of the world, the one who sat on 
the peak [of Laṅkā] vying with Mount Sumeru laughed the loudest laugh.At that time the assembly of the Bodhisattvas toge
ther with Śakra and Brahma, each thought within himself: “For what reason, I wonder, from what cause does the Blessed On
e who is the master of all the world (sarva-dharma-vaśavartin), after smiling first,6 laugh the loudest laugh? Why does 
he emit rays of light from his own body? Why, emitting [rays of light], does he remain silent, with the realisation [of 
the Truth] in his inmost self, and absorbed deeply and showing no surprise in the bliss of Samādhi, and reviewing the [t
en] quarters, looking around like the lion-king, and thinking only of the discipline, attainment, and performance of Rāv
aṇa?”

At that time, Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva who was previously requested by Rāvaṇa [to ask the Buddha concerning hi
s self-realisation], feeling pity on him, (14) and knowing the minds and thoughts of the assembly of the Bodhisattvas, a
nd observing that beings to be born in the future would be confused in their minds because of their delight in the verba
l teaching (desanapatha), because of their clinging to the letter as [fully in accordance with] the spirit (artha), beca
use of their clinging to the disciplinary powers of the Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers, —which might lead t
hem to think how it were that the Tathāgatas, the Blessed Ones, even in their transcendental state of consciousness shou
ld burst out into loudest laughter—Mahāmati the Bodhisattva asked the Buddha in order to put a stop to their inquisitive
ness the following question: “For what reason, for what cause did this laughter take place?”Said the Blessed One: “Well 
done, well done, Mahāmati! Well done, indeed, for once more, Mahāmati! Viewing the world as it is in itself and wishing 
to enlighten the people in the world who are fallen into a wrong view of things in the past, present, and future, thou u
ndertakest to ask me the question.Thus should it be with the wise men who want to ask questions for both themselves and 
others. Rāvaṇa, Lord of Laṅkā, O Mahāmati, asked a twofold question of the Tathāgatas of the past who are Arhats and per
fect Buddhas;and he wishes now to ask me too a twofold question in order to have its distinction, attainment, and scope 
ascertained—this is what is never tasted by those who practise the meditation of the Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and phil
osophers; and the same will be asked by the question-loving ten-headed one of the Buddhas to come.”

Knowing that, the Blessed One said to the Lord of Laṅkā, thus: “Ask, thou Lord of Laṅkā; the Tathāgata has given thee per
mission [to ask], delay not, whatever questions thou desirest to have answered, I will answer each of them (15) with jud
gment to the satisfaction of your heart.Keeping thy seat of thought free from [false] discrimination, observe well what 
is to be subdued at each stage; ponder things with wisdom; [seeing into] the nature of the inner principle in thyself, a
bide in the bliss of Samādhi; embraced by the Buddhas in Samādhi, abide in the bliss of tranquillisation; going beyond t
he Samādhi and understanding attained by the Śrāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas, abide in [the attainment of the Bodhisattvas]
in the stages of Acala, Sadhumati, and Dharmamegha; grasp well the egolessness of all things in its true significance; 
be anointed by the Buddhas in Samādhi at the great palace of lotus-jewels.7Surrounded by the Bodhisattvas who are sittin
g on lotuses of various sorts each supported by the gracious power of the Buddhas, thou shalt find thyself sitting on a 
lotus and each one of the Bodhisattvas looking at thee face to face. This is a realm beyond the imagination.Thou shoulds
t plan out an adequate plan and establish thyself at a stage of discipline by planning out such a plan as shall include 
[all kinds of] skilful means, so that thou comest to realise that realm which is beyond imagination; and thou shouldst a
ttain the stage of Tathāgatahood in which one is able to manifest oneself in various forms, and which is something never
seen before by the Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, philosophers, Brahma, Indra, Upendra, and others.”

At that moment the Lord of Laṅkā being permitted by the Blessed One, rose from his seat on the peak of the jewel-mountain
which shone like the jewel-lotus immaculate and shining in splendour; he was surrounded by a large company of celestial
maidens, and all kinds of garlands, flowers, perfumes, incense, unguents, umbrellas, banners, fiags, necklaces, half-ne
cklaces, diadems, tiaras, (16) and other ornaments whose splendour and excellence were never heard of or seen before, we
re created; music was played surpassing anything that could be had by the gods, Nagas, Yakshas, Rākshasas, Gandharvas, K
innaras, Mahoragas, and men; musical instruments were created equal to anything that could be had in all the world of de
sire and also such superior musical instruments were created as were to be seen in the Buddha-lands; the Blessed One and
the Bodhisattvas were enveloped in a net of jewels; a variety of dresses and high banners was made rising high in the a
ir as high as seven tala trees to great [the Buddha], showering great clouds of offerings, playing music which resounded
[all around], and then descending from the air, [the Lord of Laṅkā] sat down on the peak of the jewel-mountain ornament
ed with magnificent jewel-lotus whose splendour was second only to the sun and lightning.Sitting he made courtesy smilin
g first to the Blessed One for his permission and proposed him a twofold question: “It was asked of the Tathāgatas of th
e past, who were Arhats, Fully-Enlightened Ones, and it was solved by them. Blessed One, now I ask of thee;[the request]
will certainly be complied with by thee as far as verbal instruction is concerned8 as it was by the Buddhas [of the pas
t]. Blessed One, duality was discoursed upon by the Transformed Tathāgatas and Tathāgatas of Trans-formation, but not by
the Tathāgatas of Silence.9The Tathāgatas of Silence are absorbed in the blissful state of Samādhi, they do not discrim
inate concerning this state, nor do they discourse on it. Blessed One, thou assuredly wilt discourse on this subject of 
duality. Thou art thyself a master of all things, an Arhat, a Tathāgata. The sons of the Buddha and myself are anxious t
o listen to it.”

The Blessed One said, “Lord of Laṅkā, tell me what you mean by duality?” The Lord of the Rākshasas, (17) who was renewed 
in his ornaments, full of splendour and beauty, with a diadem, bracelet, and necklace strung with vajra thread, said, “I
t is said that even dharmas are to be abandoned, and how much more adharmas. Blessed One, why does this dualism exist th
at we are called upon to abandon? What are adharmas? and what are dharmas? How can there be a duality of things to aband
on—a duality that arises from falling into discrimination, from discriminating self-substance where there is none, from 
[the idea of] things created (bhautika) and uncreated, because the non-differentiating nature of the Ālayavijñāna is not
recognised? Like the seeing of a hair-circle as really existing in the air, [the notion of dualism] belongs to the real
m of intellection not exhaustively pur-gated. This being the. case as it should be, how could there be any abandonment [
of dharmas and adharmas]?”

Said the Blessed One, “Lord of Laṅkā, seest thou not that the differentiation of things, such as is perceived in jars and
other breakable objects whose nature it is to perish in time, takes place in a realm of discrimination [cherished by] t
he ignorant? This being so, is it not to be so understood?It is due to discrimination [cherished by] the ignorant that t
here exists the differentiation of dharma and adharma. Noble wisdom (āryajñāna), however, is not to be realised by seein
g [things this way]. Lord of Laṅkā, let it be so with the ignorant who follow the particularised aspect of existence tha
t there are such objects as jars, etc., but it is not so with the wise. One flame of uniform nature rises up depending o
n houses, mansions, parks, and terraces, and burns them down; while a difference in the flames is seen according to the 
power of each burning material which varies in length, magnitude, etc.This being so, why (18) is it not to be so underst
ood? The duality of dharma and adharma thus comes into existence. Not only is there seen a fire-flame spreading out in o
ne continuity and yet showing a variety of flames, but from one seed, Lord of Laṅkā, are produced, also in one continuit
y, stems, shoots, knots, leaves, petals, flowers, fruit, branches, all individualised.As it is with every external objec
t from which grows [a variety of] objects, so also with internal objects. From ignorance there develop the Skandhas, Dhā
tus, Āyatanas, with all kinds of objects accompanying, which grow out in the triple world where we have, as we see, happ
iness, form, speech, and behaviour, each differentiating [infinitely]. The oneness of the Vijñāna is grasped variously a
ccording to the evolution of an objective world; thus there are seen things inferior, superior, and middling, things def
iled and free from defilement, things good and bad.Not only, Lord of Laṅkā, is there such a difference of conditions in 
things generally, there is also seen a variety of realisations attained innerly by each Yogin as he treads the path of d
iscipline which constitutes his practice. How much more difference in dharma and adharma do we not see in a world of par
ticulars which is evolved by discrimination? Indeed, we do.

“Lord of Laṅkā, the differentiation of dharma and adharma comes from discrimination. Lord of Laṅkā, what are dharmas? Tha
t is, they are discriminated by the discriminations cherished by the philosophers, Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and ignora
nt people. They think that the dharmas headed by quality and substance are produced by causes—[these are the notions] to
be abandoned.Such are not to be regarded [as real] because they are appearances (lakṣana). It comes from one's clinging
[to appearances] that the manifestations of his own Mind are regarded as reality (Dharmatā). (19) Such things as jars, 
etc., are products of discrimination conceived by the ignorant, they exist not; their substances are not attainable. The
viewing of things from this viewpoint is known as their abandonment.

“What, then, are adharmas? Lord of Laṅkā, [dharmas] are unattainable as to their selfhood, they are not appearances born 
of discrimination, they are above causality; there is in them no such [dualistic] happening as is seen as reality and no
n-reality. This is known as the abandoning of dharmas.What again is meant by the unattainability of dharmas? That is, it
is like horns of a hare, or an ass, or a camel, or a horse, or a child conceived by a barren woman. They are dharmas th
e nature of which is unattainable; they are not to be thought [as real] because they are appearances. They are only talk
ed about in popular parlance if they have any sense at all; they are not to be adhered to as in the case of jars, etc.As
these [unrealities] are to be abandoned as not comprehensible by the mind (Vijñāna), so are things (bhava) of discrimin
ation also to be abandoned.This is called the abandoning of dharmas and adharmas. Lord of Laṅkā, your question as to the
way of abandoning dharmas and adharmas is hereby answered.

“Lord of Laṅkā, thou sayest again that thou hast asked [this question] of the Tathāgatas of the past who were Arhats and 
Fully-Enlightened Ones and that it was solved by them. Lord of Laṅkā, that which is spoken of as the past belongs to dis
crimination;as the past is thus a discriminated [idea], even so are the [ideas] of the future and the present. Because o
f reality (Dharmatā) the Tathāgatas do not discriminate, they go beyond discrimination and futile reasoning, they do not
follow (20) the individuation-aspect of forms (rupa)except when [reality] is disclosed for the edification of the unkno
wing and for the sake of their happiness.10 It is by transcendental wisdom (prajna) that the Tathāgata performs deeds tr
anscending forms (animittacara); therefore, what constitutes the Tathāgatas in essence as well as in body is wisdom (jñā
na). They do not discriminate, nor are they discriminated.Wherefore do they not discriminate the Manas? Because discrimi
nation is of the self, of soul, of personality.How do they not discriminate? The Manovijñāna is meant for the objective 
world where causality prevails as regards forms, appearances, conditions, and figures.Therefore, discrimination and non-
discrimination must be transcended.

“Lord of Laṅkā, beings are appearances, they are like figures painted on the wall, they have no sensibility [or conscious
ness]. Lord of Laṅkā, all that is in the world is devoid of work and action because all things have no reality,and there
is nothing heard, nothing hearing. Lord of Laṅkā, all that is in the world is like an image magically transformed. This
is not comprehended by the philosophers and the ignorant.Lord of Laṅkā, he who thus sees things, is the one who sees tr
uthfully. Those who see things otherwise walk in discrimination;as they depend on discrimination, they cling to dualism.
It is like seeing one's own image reflected in a mirror, or one's own shadow in the water, or in the moonlight, or seei
ng one's shadow in the house, or hearing an echo in the valley.People grasping their own shadows of discrimination (21) 
uphold the discrimination of dharma and adharma and, failing to carry out the abandonment of the dualism, they go on dis
criminating and never attain tranquillity.By tranquillity is meant oneness (ekāgra), and oneness gives birth to the high
est Samādhi, which is gained by entering into the womb of Tathāgatahood, which is the realm of noble wisdom realised in 
one's inmost self.”

The First Chapter Called “Rāvaṇa Asking for Instruction.”11

[CHAPTER TWO]

